Now, in the last lesson, we looked at how Swift tuples work. And now we're able to use it inside this
"else if" statement to be able to store the first number of the calculation and also the operation of the calculation.
So right at the top here, let's create a brand-new variable that is going to be our intermediate calculation.
Now, as a challenge, I want you to create this as a tuple that can store a string and a number that corresponds
to the first number that the user is going to calculate with,
and also the operation.
Now, remember, all of the things that we spoke about in the advanced Swift section and try to create this
tuple so that it complies with all of the best practice.
Pause the video and give it a go.
All right.
So here's our tuple up here.
And we're not going to give it any values up here
when we initialize our structure.
So we're only going to specify it's data type.
And remember, we specify a tuples data type with a set of parentheses.
Now, the first item inside our tuple is going to be the first number.
So this is going to be a Double and I'm going to call it n1.
Now, the second thing we need to store in here is the calculation method.
So I'll just call that calcMethod and this is going to be a String.
Now, I don't actually have a value for this tuple
when I initialize my CalculatorLogic structure,
so I have to be able to set it to nil when I create CalculatorLogic.
That means I have to turn it into an optional.
And I do that by just adding a question mark to the end of the entire type,
right?
So in this case, the type is a Double and so the question mark goes at the end of the Double.
But in this case, the type of the tuple is all of this,
and so the question mark goes right at the end.
Now, if instead you'd added the question mark here,
then that means you can create tuples that may or may not have an n1.
And if you created one here, then that means you can create a tuple that may or may not have an n1
or a calcMethod.
Now, that's not what we want,
so we're going to delete those, too,
but we're going to keep the entire tuple as an optional.
Now, the final thing to consider is, remember, whenever creating global variables to start it out as a private
var, that way we prevent other classes from messing withintermediateCalculation and, certainly, no other
class or structure actually needs to be able to modify our intermediate calculation.
It's a bit of data that we've saved right in the middle of something we're doing inside CalculatorLogic,
so we have to defend it from other people accidentally changing or modifying it.
So now that that's done, we can head over into this
"else if" and we can set our intermediateCalculation, and I'm going to set it equal to a tuple,
so a set of parentheses, and then I'm going to tap into n1.
Now, I find that Xcode is not great with autosuggest
when it comes to tuples,
so I like to type it out just manually.
Now,  n1 is going to be the number that got passed over with the calculation,
so that is equal to n.
And then the next thing is the calcMethod.
And this is simply going to be the symbol that got passed in when this calcMethod was called.
So, now we have set our tuple inside this "else if."
So that means when a user taps on a number, and then taps on one of the calcButtons, will pass over
the number as well as the calculation method over to our CalculatorLogic.
And then it's caught inside here
if it was a plus sign that they pressed. aAnd we save that plus sign along with the number inside our
tuple.
That's called intermediateCalculation for later use.
Now, at this point, Xcode, again, tells you that self is immutable because we're inside a struct and
we're changing one of the properties here,
so therefore, we have to mark this as mutating.
So in order to succeed at this challenge, you actually have to have remembered a lot of the things that
we discussed in this module.
So if any of those things were at all confusing, be sure to have a look back at some of the lessons previously
where we discussed access levels or structs and classes and some of the advanced Swift best practice.
So, now we have to address what should happen when the user finally presses the equals button.
Well, at this point, we should trigger the entire calculation and use what we saved inside the intermediate
calculation,
right?
So let's go ahead and call another method in here which we'll call
performTwoNumberCalculation. And this method is only going to have one input and that is going to be the second
number that we're performing the calculation with which is, again, going to be a Double.
So that number, in this case, will be, right?
Because when the user has pressed the equal sign, then that means we passed in the second number that
they tapped on.
So let's go back to our calculator.
When I press on 5 and then plus, then the calculate method gets triggered, and we fall into this "else if"
bracket where we set our tuple intermediateCalculation to equal the first number that I typed which
was the 5, and the calcMethod which is this plus symbol.
Now, once that's done, that gets saved and stashed away ready for the next number to come in.
And at this point, let's say I press on 3, and then I press equals, and I expect an answer
at this point.
So then the calculate function gets called again and I catch it inside this "else if" statement because
the symbol was the equal sign.
And then I call a function that will perform the whole calculation passing in the second number that
it needed to add to the first one which happened to be 3 in my example.
So let's go ahead and create this function called performTwoNumberCalculation and it expects a parameter
called n2 which is going to be a Double, and it's going to return a Double as the outputs. And this
functionality is internal to our calculator because it performs the second half of the calculation.
And so this shouldn't be called by anybody outside this current structure.
So we can mark this method as private as well to prevent from any other classes or structs from accidentally
calling it because it will surely create an error.
But inside this function, we're going to group together all of our intermediate calculation that we saved
into our tuple.
So because our tuple is an optional, then we have to unwrap it or use optional binding to check to make
sure that we definitely actually have values for it.
Because if the user simply pressed the equal sign right at the beginning by accident without having
any operations specified or any number specified, we don't want our app to crash,
right?
So let's create an "if let" and let's say that if let n1 =  intermediateCalculation.n1,
and then we can do the optional binding calcMethod in the same line by simply adding a comma.
So if let n1 = intermediateCalculation.n1, and also let operation equal
intermediateCalculation.calcMethod, then and only then do we perform the code inside this block.
So you can see that if I split this code into two lines, we are creating two constants.
One is called n1,  one is called operation. and we're creating it by optionally chaining
intermediateCalculation.
So we're saying if intermediate calculation is not nil, that's what that question mark says,
then tap into the n1 value inside it and bind it to this thing called n1.
And if intermediateCalculation is not nil, again, grab the calcMethod out of it and assign it to our
operation.
So now that we've got n1 and operation, both unwrapped as non-optionals, we know that they're definitely not
nil,
then, in this case, we can complete our calculation. So we can say that if the operation was equal to plus,
then in that case, we should return as the output n1 + n2,
and that is our addition functionality.
So if we have a look back at our "if" statement over here, it doesn't make sense to check for plus, minus,
times, multiply, divide over here if we can do it separately over here.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going to cut that "else if" statement and I'm going to put it in as an "else"
instead.
So that means that if the symbol that was passed over was not any of these simple calculations, and it
wasn't an equals, then everything else, namely, plus, minus, multiply, divide, should be caught inside here
and we should create an intermediateCalculation, because everything else that remains other than these
three and this button is going to be a two-number calculation. And we're going to store the actual symbol
inside this calcMethod inside our tuple.
So once the user presses the next number and they press equals to get the result, then we perform our
two-number calculation which is a private function,
so it can only be called within this current structure, not from outside,
and we complete the operation by checking to see which one needed to be performed, and we return the
results.
So, now Xcode is telling us that this result is not handled over here.
So how should we handle it?
Well, of course, we're going to return it as the output of this function,
right?
So as a challenge, I want you to complete this part where we check for all four different operations:
plus, minus, multiply, and divide, and specify what should be returned.
Now, because we've got four things that we're checking. It doesn't make sense to have it as an "if" statement.
So as a part of the challenge, I want you to change this to a switch statement so you can switch on the
operation that needs to be performed.
So pause the video and go ahead and give that ago.
Okay. So let's change this "if" to a "switch" by changing the keyword.
Next, let's delete all of this and all of this, so we have a blank switch statement and we're switching
on the operation.
So let's address some of those cases.
In the case where the operation is equal to a plus sign, then we want to return n1 + n2.
But in the case where the operation was a minus sign that the user wanted,
then we're going to return
n1 - n2.
Next, if the case was a multiply, and I recommend that to get the symbol for the multiplication, you head
over to the Main.storyboard and just double click on that multiply button to copy the text that's in
there because unless the unicode is exactly the same, then this won't work.
So, now that we've got the multiply symbol in there, we're going to go ahead and return n1 multiplied
by n2. And finally, we're going to address the division which, again, I'm going to copy from over here
and I'm going to paste it right here.
So the last case, we're going to return n1 / n2.
And as with all switch statements, you should always have a default case
and this just catches out the cases where your operation that's being passed in does not match any of
these.
And in our case, that would be very, very weird.
But we should still catch it and we should throw a fatal error because it's something that should never
really happen.
And in this case, we're saying that fatal error, the operation passed in does not match any of the cases.
So we'll know what's happening at that point.
Now, as you can see, we've had this error screaming at us for a little while now, and it's saying that we're
missing a return statement in a function that's expected to return Double.
Now, you can see we've got lots of return statements, right?
So why are they being so hard on us?
Well, it's because we've got these "if lets."
And that means that there's cases when these would fail.
For example, if the user opens up the app and the first thing they do is they tap on the equal sign,
well, in that case, we're going to call our performTwoNumberCalculation and there might not even be
an intermediateCalculation yet,
right?
Just because they tapped on it by accident.
Well, in this case, we shouldn't crash the app,
we should instead just ignore it.
So how do we do that in code?
Well, we can simply return nil because there is nothing to perform our two number calculation with.
Now, in order to be able to return nil,
we can't specify that this method only can output Doubles.
It has to be able to output optional Doubles, so that we can return it as a nil.
So in this case, if they accidentally tapped on the equal sign, we call performTwoNumberCalculation,
this turns into nil,
we return nil as the output to our calculateMethod.
And over here, we catch that inside this "guard" statement which if you notice is, again,
a fatalError which will crash on app.
So this is a really good point to talk about what is the difference between a "guard let" and an "if let"
because you'll see them all over the place in a lot of the Swift code out there in the wild.
But it's really difficult for an intermediate or beginner's programmer to understand just when to
use a "guard let" versus an "if let."
And this is a perfect illustration.
Well, in this case, when you use a "guard let," it means that you're guarding against something terrible, right?
In very few cases,
do you expect this "else" to be triggered?
That's what a "guard let" is used.
We're guarding against really bad things from happening.
That should never really happen unless we had some sort of brain freeze and we completely screwed up
our code.
Now, if we're using an "if let" instead, then that means that we're expecting that nine times out of ten,
this will not be nil and we will be able to trigger this block inside here.
But we're also accepting that sometimes it might just be nil and that's fine.
We don't have to do anything.
We can simply ignore those cases.
So, now that I've changed that "guard let" to an "if let" and only when I get a non-nil value from my calculation
do I update my displayValue,
then it means that if I've accidentally-- then that means that if the user has accidentally tapped on the
equal sign without any prior numbers or prior operations, then we don't crash our app,
instead our code just ignores it.
So this is a really good illustration of why you would use "guard let" versus "if let." And I recommend that
if you really want to get down to the nitty-gritties of it, try changing it around and run the app and
see what happens for yourself,
just so that you can get first-hand experience of what I'm saying to you.
All right.
So our app is pretty much done, the last thing that I'm going to change is just to make the set of "if" statements
into a "switch" statement just to clean up our code.
So, now we're ready to test our app and see if it works exactly the way we expect it to.
So let's try 9 x 2 = 18 + 6 = 24 / 4 = 6.
Clear
and percentage. Everything works perfectly.
Now, there's a lot more that you could do to this calculator by adding extra buttons, extra functionality,
you could make it into a graphing calculator if you really wanted to or you could make it more robust
and more reliable in terms of the code as well.
But I hope that this has been a fun and interesting project. And along the way, we've learned about access
levels, struct versus classes, mutating functions, how to use the "self" keyword, internal and external parameter
names, swift tuples, and so much more. So as you can see, it's a jam-packed lesson full of advanced concepts.
So, now that you've reached this stage in your development journey, it's really important that if there's
anything that you don't fully understand, or if there's something that you want to learn more about, then
be sure to do some extra reading, and especially by reading through the Swift Programming Language Online
Book which you can access at docs.swift,org/swift-book, and you can look through it and
read up on the parts that we've covered, and try it out yourself just so that you can make all of the
knowledge in the tutorials your own.
So it's all from me, Angela@theAppBrewery.
So till next time, guys.